My name is Aaron Jacobs. I work at Posit on our sort of professional commercial products.
I'm going to talk today about something sort of thematic that we've changed about our pro products.
When I submitted this talk, when I was working on this in sort of December,
I thought that maybe no one had heard of any of these features and that few people outside
of the company or even the team that I was working with would know about this stuff at all.
This week, it has been very surprising because not only do people keep asking me about this,
but we now have a ton of demos in the lounge and James mentioned this stuff in the keynote,
like all that was news to me. I think that this work has accelerated incredibly quickly.
And because of that, I think today I'm going to actually talk more about like the
strategy, I think, and the ideas behind it and sort of what influence like our thinking about
these problems, as opposed to sort of walking through specific features. And hopefully that is
interesting. So I think this is a pretty mixed audience is my guess. Can I see a show of hands
for people who have actually used Workbench? That's so many more than I was expecting. Awesome.
Okay, so if you are not in that crowd, have you used rstudio? Like most people. Okay,
so I think that a lot of people who are familiar with rstudio think about Workbench as like the
pro version of rstudio. Especially because actually Workbench was called rstudio server
pro for like the first couple of years that existed. But I don't think this is a terribly
accurate view anymore. Not the least because Workbench now supports four data science IDEs
and as you learned this morning, pretty soon five. But in our own words, we would describe Workbench
as, this is what our website says, a secure and scalable developer platform for data science and
Python. The way that I generally think about Workbench is like as a centralized hosting for
data science IDEs. And it includes a ton of features that are geared towards folks that
are working in enterprise. So that includes things like SSO support, admin managed R and
Python environments, resource controls, auditing, monitoring, a form of project sharing, and more.
So more broadly than Workbench, I think I would describe our professional products as devoted to
making code first data science successful inside of organizations. One of the things I talked about
in the keynote this morning is that we do tend to draw the line between our open source and
professional work in that way. The focus of our professional products is very much on organizations
and that tends to be the dividing line. But one thing that they didn't talk about very much today
is the problems that you tend to encounter in enterprises are often fundamentally uninteresting
or surprising if you're a pure open source user. And I kind of want to talk a little bit about
today. So what does it mean to be successful inside of organizations? I mean the truth is that
we are also constantly trying to figure that out. That's the process of making a commercial product
for customers. You have to try and figure out what they actually want. And if we know one thing is
that the meaning of that has not stayed constant over time. So it's readily apparent to us
that the capabilities that drove customers to purchase RStudio Server Pro in 2014 when we
released it are not the same things that drive them to purchase Posit Workbench in 2024. What our
customers and users need out of our professional products is actually changing over time.
And what I want to focus on today, one way of thinking about it, is that it's one of the
ways that one of the important ways that we have observed that data science inside of
organizations is changing and the ways that our professional products are kind of adapting.
instance right so um if any of you remember if you think back to when you were new to data science
i'm sure plenty of pedagogical material gave you this idea that all data science would begin and
end with tidy self-contained cse or maybe parquet files that were just waiting to be analyzed so i
like to describe that as like the download the training data and get started like that's that's
the world view there and i think as most of you probably know the reality is much more complicated
so a key part of data science work is just confronting the fact that data is messy and
inconclusive and incomplete its provenance is unclear its value is often unclear
and plenty of folks i think at this conference will have something to say about this problem
but i want to focus on a bit on a second very unglamorous reality data science work inside of
organizations which is that getting access to data at all can be a strump so i think for much
of posits early history we mostly saw enterprise customers manage access to data if they were doing
so at all via window files windows file shares and on-prem database management systems like oracle
sql server and over time actually our enterprise products ended up working reasonably well in this
context but i think over the last five years or so because everything is slow in enterprise
we've seen a pretty dramatic shift among our customers to the cloud surprise and a lot of the
fairly simple access control mechanisms that we were accustomed to and the credential paradigms
that we used worked in in this on-prem context have not served folks well in this brave new cloud
world so to give um a hopefully humorous example of this suppose you are your team
inside of your organization is tasked with analyzing customer churn so cust we have classic
problem right um so when you get started on this project you know that your company stores basic
customer data in salesforce so you know you'll eventually probably want to access it by its
by salesforce's api it turns out that this means asking your it department to register a salesforce
external app for you which takes a few weeks and when it comes back that comes back with a warning
not to embed the oauth client credentials in scripts or reports whatever that means
you know and next you want to understand how your customer's experience in your web app
might have influenced their desire to churn um to get that data you know you might actually need
to ask a friend on the development team because you want them to want to run a query against the
production database which is in say aws aurora because uh the activity data that you actually
need hasn't yet been persisted to the internal data lake the internal data lake uses azure sql
server as it turns out because in the year that that project started microsoft gave me more cloud
credits than amazon and then meanwhile the cio is saying everything's going to move to snowflake
starting in the fall but they've been saying that for three years and you don't really know
that's still a real thing at all and if you're counting this as three different sql dialects
you need to know at this point you know meanwhile you've heard that one of the other departments
has been playing with databricks or spark and databricks and it seems like maybe you could get
access to cool streaming data there to make a nice dashboard but they're hesitant to give you access
because they want to make sure that the compute costs for your project don't get attributed to
their department then you discover through salesforce that some important aspects of customer
information are actually only available in the original invoices which are pdfs stored in an aws
s3 bucket and they're in an s3 bucket because that was what was used as an internal tool that
is currently unmaintained but is critical for the success of the sales organization
and then it turns out that it's not the same aws account that you normally use but it's actually a
different one and that one by policy does not allow you to use im user credentials and now
you have to figure out how to get im role assumption working um and then to top all of it
off um customer success only tracks their meetings in a google spreadsheet which has cross references
to google docs with their notes from those calls which are the only place where you could find a
textual source that might actually contain hints as to why those customers change and for which
you need a gcp service account to access which is disparable um and so on and so on and so on
so hopefully some of you find us amusing some of you it may trigger ptsd
certainly does for me uh and i think that this is an exaggeration but having talked
to a reasonable number of customers i think it is only a slight exaggeration
um no i missed this sorry so i think that like the common themes that we hear today when we're
talking um about the challenges of getting access to data inside of organizations would be complexity
so although there's a limited number of cloud or data platforms so this is essentially aws
azure gcp snowflake and databricks those are kind of from our vantage point the biggest ones that we
see many customers are using more than one many customers are actually using all of them together
and everyone seems to be in the middle of a year's long migration to a internal data platform that is
yet to materialize and so you are even more likely to be pulling data from multiple places
in in the same projects the second thing that we see is new forms of authentication and
authorization the native language of these cloud platforms is iam and oas not usernames and
passwords and the third major theme we see uh is more scrutiny i would say about the use of
credentials so when i worked as a data scientist the entire department actually the company
shared a single database account and passwords this would be considered wildly actually wildly
unsecure even at the time um but it would be wildly inappropriate today it folks are increasingly
unhappy with data scientists managing long-lived credentials themselves they really do not want
you to embed your personal snowflake username and password inside of a quarter report which
is absolutely the formal guidance that snowflake sent me via email and pdf
a year ago this is not an obscure solution not only have the technologies changed the
expectations have changed as well and actually something or a co-worker reminded me of this
morning there was a big data breach at snowflake about six weeks ago it was caused because someone
was using a service account that they did not use single sign-on with unsurprisingly because
it's a service account so you can't do single sign-on directly anyway um i think that something
that posit is always valued both on the open source and open open source side and in its
professional products is meeting people where they are helping data scientists be heroes inside of
their organizations and right now we think that an increasing amount of heroism is coming from
the ability of our users to navigate these complex data platforms so with that in mind i
think beginning about two years ago we started building deep integrations into workbench about
two years ago to manage data and cloud platform credentials for you and today you know as of the
workbench release this week i hope it's this week uh that includes managed credentials for aws for
azure for databricks and snowflake this is one of the models there's various ui around
so what this means in practice because you're all nerds here is that we've taught workbench to speak
these new languages like iam and oa the idea is that when you arrive in an ide like our studio
all of the credentials you need to access your organization's data are already present
quietly in the background you don't need to manage an aws access key you don't need to manage a
databricks personal access token you don't need a snowflake service account you don't as a data
scientist need to do this work yourself this makes not only you happy but it also makes your admin
and hopefully it folks very happy as well now on the subject of being nerdy you may be interested
to know that the way this works under the hood is that workbench will manage configurations for
files and environment variables for you we will do things like run through this oauth stuff we
will refresh tokens for you we will generate these configuration files and we've been very
very careful to make this as compatible with the existing tools as possible so you'll find things
like the aws cli just like works in our studio you'll find that the databricks sdks just work
inside of visual studio code in python the snowflake cli works like an amazing percentage
of this work was actually just very carefully reading the public source code of these sdks and
figuring out how they worked figuring out how they manage credentials and teaching workbench
to operate in that paradigm and something actually edgar talked about a little bit today is that
we then took a lot of what we had learned by looking particularly at python ecosystem
and then like ported some of those credential paradigms to r
largely through the odbc package but also through other mechanisms
um
but um so i would say you know what's next generally for us for um managed credentials
so i said we we currently support four major providers some of those have sort of paper cuts
that we would like to improve um i think that'll certainly happen for aws and azure
but one of the things that happened as a result of this project is that introducing some of these
capabilities into workbench changed how we thought about what workbench could do as a project
or could do as a product and so a good illustration of this is workbench has supported this idea of
like ad hoc jobs for a while but it was not clear really what the advantage of using that feature
over just running r at a terminal would be but with managed credentials we actually have a really
nice answer which is that this allows jobs to use credentials so you can have something like
you can be working on a project and you need to run a simulation that takes six hours so you run
it overnight and it uses some databricks data and right now we don't really have we wouldn't really
have had an answer to that but with managed credentials you can do things like you know
this job is going to run for six hours and five hours in it needs to pull some new data from
databricks but workbench will have refreshed the credential for you so it'll work
it also allows us to tackle you know problems we've had for a long time we didn't know how to
solve like how do we answer this you know paper cut issues around how people use git inside of
workbench it's very painful to manage ssh keys we don't have a great oauth story hey wait no we have
a great oauth story now can we make that work and all of this to say i think that i'm very excited
about the direction this sort of means for the project and the sort of future of it
the last thing i'll say is we have not forgot about publishing so it's not enough just have a
great authoring experience we know that these cloud credentials are now vitally important for
the kind of data products people are producing ports emails dashboards wonderful shiny and shiny
python applications streamlined apps viola apps the diversity is wild or wide and i think that
definitely when i was preparing this talk there was nothing to say about this but as of last week
connect has publicly released its first round of support for these integrations as well and now
i'm even more hopeful about this future because we can probably tell a great story where you can
move from working on data science projects that use all of these new cloud credential systems
to having a seamless publishing workflow that picks up on these credentials james mentioned
this morning in his keynote that also there's some very cool aspects of uh this connect integration
for viewer based permissions um so i would say okay so that's it i can answer a question i will
say definitely it's the case that you should drop by if you're interested in this at all
drop by the lounge um i think like the eight people in the world who i could pick to talk
about that are basically all here including most of the engineers who work me on these
projects across both products and also solution engineers who give better demos than i could ever
aspire to in my life so thank you uh thank you aaron and as a solutions engineer i'll say some
of our demos aren't quite as good as uh maybe you'd like to think they are but you know i gotta say
i've had the experience of watching a solution engineer give a demo for a feature that i wrote
and being like wow you did a much better job so you guys are great yeah okay yeah so a couple of
questions um well this isn't a question this is just an exclamation github credentials yes please
yeah actually yeah yes uh we'll see we'll see some you know i have to argue with tom
hawk who's the product manager about feature spots for workbench um but yes okay and i guess i mean
it's not a net question at all so you know there's gitlab and bitbucket and yeah oh yeah it all works
okay sorry no no i won't say it but yeah um it's on our mind is this solution okay
let's say it's good to know is this solution also available in the free r studio download
so no because it's it's arguable that it doesn't really make sense because if you if you're
operating on desktop a lot of this oauth stuff like works through a browser flow and typically
uses like localhost redirect like all of those workflows already kind of work the place that
they're really painful is on server environments and in particular the main difference is if you're
working on desktop you want to be managing stuff yourself because like you're operating as an
individual but one of the main benefits for workbench which is a trade-off right is that
you're moving to a more admin controlled environment and that is a trade-off right like
there are definitely uncomfortable aspects of not working on your desktop so i think about this as
being like yeah anyway um so i think that i could say more about this there's various technical
and also social reasons why it doesn't really make sense for those features to be available in
the open source version and this is actually one of the an illustration of that point i tried to
clumsily make at the beginning which is i think we sometimes think about um
like could we not just put enterprise features in our open source products but i think a lot
of the time they're not as portable as you think they are and often they rely on assumptions that
are not possible in an open source context or are fundamentally uninteresting in many cases to open
to open source so i would say no things are not coming to our open source products though
we did like the odbc the odbc work for example like that that's all open source that'll
also back that's open source
okay thank you um are these off integrations only the r studio ide ha ha yeah no they are not they
already work in vs code of course we made them work in vs code because we we knew that positron
i mean um so they will work on they'll they'll work on launch when positron comes to workbench
and also we intend to port them to jupyter lab don't get me started on how difficult that is
but we'll do that too i mean i'll ask you that off the edge uh can saml or odic connections
be latently asserted by workbench can be latently asserted by workbench
i don't actually know what that means i would say there's already machinery
in workbench to do clever things with oidc that's how the aws integration works
don't get me started on saml and how it lacks a refresh protocol and how that makes everything
terrible um if you're really interested in that come find me after and i maybe can answer your
question for aaron's gonna be like fighting off the crowd uh are these integrations only for
individual salesforce databricks user accounts or can you use a service account so they are focused
on the ive user so i i think the the there's a larger theme which is that these platforms are
increasingly moving away from things like service accounts so i don't know like if you go if you go
to the databricks page they're like please do not use personal access tokens anymore please use a
lot you go to the snowflake page it says please do not use you know service accounts for you go to
the im user page on aws's documentation it's like please do not use this please use short
credentials so i think that we're going in this direction of like short live
individually kind of like attributed uh credentials that said these systems basically
can all be sort of like individually turned off when needed so you can make all existing
patterns work like we don't we don't we don't close the door on using other methods
yeah thank you aaron and thank you to the rest yeah i would also say i would say like don't don't
get the impression that i did all of this work myself yeah i think that one of the things about
a lot of at least conference talks is like there you're talking about open source work that you've
done and it's like work that you have individually done so many people internally at posit and also
externally um contributed to these features and they were done over the course of two years so
as you imagine all right well yeah all right i'm getting on the stage
you